---
  title: Mobbing With AI
  subtitle: Revolutionizing Software Development with Mob Programming and AI
  author: Austin Chadwick
  type: ai-assist
  layout: post
---

In the dynamic world of software development, innovation is the name of the
game.  New approaches and technologies continuously reshape the landscape,
leading to improved processes and products. One such revolutionary concept
making waves my mob is **Mob Programming with AI**. This unique blend of human
and artificial intelligence opens up a new dimension in product and software
development, transforming the way teams work and collaborate. 
 
**Mob Programming** is where a group of developers collectively works on a
single task or problem. It promotes teamwork, knowledge sharing, and a focus on
the task at hand. With the introduction of 'Robots' as members of the mob, AI
becomes a powerful ally in this collaborative development approach. These
'Robots' can include co-pilots, ChatGPT, Bing Chat, Bard, or other AI tools that
offer assistance throughout the development process. 
 
One of the most significant advantages of incorporating AI into the mob is the
role it plays in Test-Driven Development (TDD) cycles. The AI helps identify
what we affectionately call **ZOMBIES** - Zero, One, Many (or more complex
inputs), Boundary behaviors, Interfaces, Exceptions, and Simple scenarios. It
not only assists in generating red tests but also offers implementations to make
those tests pass. Additionally, it occasionally provides guidance on
refactorings, streamlining the development process. 
 
However, it's essential to be aware of the limitations and potential pitfalls
when working with AI in a mob programming setting. Some of these limitations
include occasional "hallucinations," where the AI might produce unexpected or
incorrect results. It's crucial to remember that AI, despite its advancements,
is often about 80% correct and not infallible. The code generated may work but
might not be as clean or efficient as expected. 
 
Nevertheless, the results of incorporating AI into mob programming have been
promising. The human members of the mob act as quality assurance, checking the
AI's work and making necessary adjustments. This synergy between human and AI
members has transformed various aspects of software development, including
mobile app code, data transformation code, CI/CD code, domain knowledge such as
irrigation industry product categorization, and even enhancing stakeholder
engagement by generating humor and jokes. 
 
The fusion of human creativity and AI's computational power is redefining the
software development landscape. Mob Programming with AI opens up new
possibilities for innovation, efficiency, and collaboration, offering a glimpse
into the future of development teams where the best of both worlds work in
harmony to create exceptional software products. With its challenges and all,
this approach heralds a promising future for the software development industry,
and its potential seems limitless.
