---
  title: Make jam from what you learn
  subtitle: how do we preserve new knowledge for our future selves?
  author: Alex Bird
  layout: post
---

When we learn a new skill that is immediately applicable and start using it
every day, then it will become instinctive long before we forget about it.

Other times, we learn something (through reading, training, or experience) that
we recognize as valuable to ourselves or others, but we won't get to apply it
frequently enough to convert it to instinct.

How can we store the things we learn so that we have access to them when we need
them?

If you have a small strawberry farm that you run with your family and you take
in a huge harvest, some strawberries will be eaten right away, some will go to
waste, and some you will preserve -- by freezing, or turning into jam, or
canning.

Learning in public is a way of turning your new knowledge "into jam": you package it up
in a way that it doesn't spoil (and it may even be more delicious than the fresh
fruit it was made from).

This post talks about the value of writing about what we're learning.

### Boil it down // summarize

When making jam, you prepare the berries (remove stems, bruised sections, etc.)
and boil them down to cook and thicken them.

In a similar way, writing forces us to simplify and summarize what we've
learned. Editing helps us remove interesting but non-essential points and
produce memorable summaries.

### Add sugar // capture the context

The other main ingredient in jam is sugar, which is a necessary part of the
chemical reaction that preserves the jam.

When we learn, we mix the new knowledge with our experience and context so we
can make sense of our learning. When we take notes from a lecture or while
reading a book, we tend to emphasize the new knowledge or ideas, but don't take
much time capturing our experience or context. (Why would we? We're here to
learn something new, not reflect on something we already know.)

When our future self or someone else looks at our notes, they will be hard to
understand if we don't remember or know the context and experience that filled
in the gaps in the new knowledge.

By writing for others, we force ourselves to ask "what do I know that readers
wouldn't know?". This discipline of empathy helps us think about what other
information is required for our notes to be sensible to others or to our future
selves.

### Give the jam away // get feedback

After a big jamming session, you *might* have enough jam to share. Writing, on
the other hand, is not deminished by sharing; we can copy it for free.

After we write, if we know of anyone who would be interested in what we've
written about, then we can get feedback for free. They read what we've written,
and learn something -- it benefits them. And then they ask questions or give
feedback, that helps us refine our understanding ("boil down the jam") or
identify missing context ("add more sugar") so that the thing we learned is well
preserved.

### Learning in public

This idea has been written about by others under the title "learning in public".
There is practical advice that you may find helpful in this post:
[*Learn In Public: The fastest way to learn*](https://www.swyx.io/learn-in-public). 

